<meta http-equiv='Content-Type' content='text/html; charset=utf-8'> 

1/5 

G O V ER N M EN T 
P R IN C IP A LITY O F LIEC H TEN S TEIN   

 

 

 Liechtenstein(cid:146)s  
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) 
 

Submission  of  22  April  2015  under  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on 
Climate Change, UNFCCC 

The  content  of  Liechtenstein(cid:146)s  INDC  follows  the  guidelines  established  by  the  20th 
Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC in December 2014 in Lima, Peru. Reference is 
made in particular to paragraphs 13 and 14 of 1/CP.201.  

1. 

Summary 

The assumptions underlying Liechtenstein(cid:146)s INDC are based on the possibility to achieve 
emission  reductions  abroad  which  may  be  accounted  towards  Liechtenstein(cid:146)s  reduction 
target in 2030.2 However, primary focus will be given on domestic emission reductions. 
Liechtenstein aims at a reduction of greenhouse gases by 40 % compared to 1990 by 2030. 
The reduction target will be subject to the approval of the Liechtenstein Parliament.  

Reduction Target 

40 % 

Base Year 

1990 

Timeframe 

2021 - 2030 

 

2.  National Circumstances 

With a population of 37(cid:146)100 inhabitants and a total area of only 160 km2, Liechtenstein is 
one of the smallest countries in the world. Within 50 years Liechtenstein developed from 
a mainly agricultural state to one of the most highly industrialized countries in the world. 
The high value-added development until today is particularly due to the strong industrial 
sector  and  financial  services,  while  the  public  sector  of  the  national  economy  is 

                                                      

1 http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2014/cop20/eng/10a01.pdf  
2 To this regard Liechtenstein reserves the right to revisit its overall commitment if no internationally agreed rules are given. 

Postfach 684 | 9490 Vaduz | F(cid:252)rstentum Liechtenstein | www.au.llv.li 

 

2/5 

comparatively  small.  From  1990  until  2012  the  country(cid:146)s  GDP  experienced  a  growth  of 
about  140  %,  with  an  increase  of  population  of  around  25  %.  At  the  same  time 
Liechtenstein  managed  to  decouple  its  economic  growth  from  its  greenhouse  gas 
emissions. Despite the growth of its economy, the increase in population and commuters 
Liechtenstein(cid:146)s emissions are today below the levels of 1990. 

Figure 1: Trend from 1990-2012 of resident population, employed persons and commuters in Liechtenstein 
as well GDP and greenhouse gas emissions in percent to 1990.3  
 
The decoupling of greenhouse gas emissions and economic growth is the consequence of 
the  establishment  of  rigorous  environmental  standards  and  a  comprehensive  set  of 
climate  related  policy  measures  such  as  the  participation  in  the  European  Emissions 
Trading  regime,  levying  of  CO2  emissions  from  the  combustion  of  fossil  fuels  or  the 
obligation to compensate emissions caused by motor fuel consumption. 

 

                                                      

3  Source:  Gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  1990  -  1997:  Office  of  Statistics  (OS),  Statistical  yearbook.  GDP  1998  -  2012:  OS,  National 
accounts.  Resident  population:  OS,  Population  Statistics.  Greenhouse  gas  emissions:  OS,  Environment  statistics.  Please  note  gross 
domestic product (GDP) at current prices, source data in billion CHF. Number of employees and commuters origin from Table 3_.1_01 
and T_3.1_02 of the statistical year book. Please note that the number of commuters is corrected for out-bound commuters. 

 

3. 

Ex ante information according to paragraph 14 of 1/CP.20  

3/5 

3.1  Quantifiable information on the reference point 
For its reduction target Liechtenstein will apply 1990 as base year. The quantified amount 
of emissions in 1990 is currently considered to be 228.7 Kt CO2 eq4. This figure is however 
provisional since the 1990 value will be fixed once the respective initial report is defined. 

3.2  Time frame for implementation and scope and coverage 
Liechtenstein(cid:146)s INDCs encompass a reduction target within a time frame from 2021 until 
2030.  The  scope  of  Liechtenstein  INDCs  covers  all  sectors  relevant  to  the  state(cid:146)s 
greenhouse gas emissions. The respective sectors and subsectors are based on the most 
recent  IPCC  Guidelines  for  National  Greenhouse  Gas  Inventories:  Energy,  Industrial 
Processes, Solvent Use, Agriculture, LULUCF and Waste.  
Liechtenstein(cid:146)s INDCs cover seven greenhouse gases (as foreseen under the UNFCCC and 
the  Kyoto  Protocol)  and  generally  apply  the  base  year  19905:  carbon  dioxide  (CO2), 
methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), 
sulfur hexafluoride (SF6), and nitrogen trifluoride (NF3). 
 
3.3  Planning Processes 
The planning processes for Liechtenstein encompass the sectors mentioned above under 
3.2.  These  sectors  are  addressed  by  individual  sectorial  policies  which  are  guided  by 
Liechtenstein(cid:146)s  climate  strategy  which  will  be  revised  in  the  course  of  2015/2016.  The 
strategy requires an interdisciplinary coordination of the focussed areas.  
The focus will be on the coordination of climate relevant measures within Liechtenstein(cid:146)s 
energy policy, transport policy, environmental policy, agricultural and forestry policy.  
In addition to that the relevant CO2-Act will be revised in the course of 2016 / 2017 to 
reflect  the  targets  for  2030.  The  EU  energy  and  climate  policies  will  also  contribute  to 
reach Liechtenstein(cid:146)s goal within the energy sector on the long run. Within these policy 
areas Liechtenstein(cid:146)s influence is very limited.  
 

                                                      

4 NIR 2014 (1990-2012) Resubmission 
5 not relevant where reference level apply (e.g. forests) 

 

4/5 

4.  Assumptions and methodological approaches 

The assumptions underlying Liechtenstein(cid:146)s INDC are based on the possibility to achieve 
emission  reductions  abroad  which  may  be  accounted  towards  Liechtenstein(cid:146)s  reduction 
target in 2030.6 However, primary focus will be given on domestic emission reductions. 
The methodological approaches for estimating and accounting for anthropogenic green-
house gas emissions and removals use standard methods. The emissions in Liechtenstein 
are  calculated  based  on  the  standard  methods  and  procedures  of  the  Revised  1996 
Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  (IPCC)  Guidelines  for  National  Greenhouse 
Gas Inventories (IPCC 1997a, 1997b, 1997c) and IPCC Good Practice Guidance (IPCC 2000, 
IPCC 2003) as adopted by the UNFCCC.  
 
5. 

Fairness and ambition 

its 

INDC  within  the  context  of  national 
Liechtenstein  understands  fairness  of 
circumstances.  As  Liechtenstein  is  one  of  the  smallest  countries  in  the  world  its  total 
emissions count up to 0.0073 % of the global total emissions. Liechtenstein(cid:146)s responsibility 
in  terms  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions  is  insignificantly  low.  Nevertheless  per  capita 
emissions  of  6.1  tonnes  in  Liechtenstein  lie  within  the  European  average.  The  overall 
reduction target  of  40 %  compared  to  1990  corresponds  to  per  capita emissions  of 3.6 
CO2eq.  The  reduction  path  is  considered  to  be  very  ambitious  taking  into  account  the 
already  existing  very  high  technical  environmental  standards  applied  in  Liechtenstein. 
Moreover the reduction path is well in line with the respective recommendations made by 
the IPCC in 2014.  
Liechtenstein stays committed to deliver its fair share within the international efforts to 
combat climate change.  
 

                                                      

6 To this regard Liechtenstein reserves the right to revisit its overall commitment if no internationally agreed rules are given. 

 

6. 

Contribution  to  the  objective  described  in  Art.  2  of  the 
UNFCCC 

5/5 

Liechtenstein(cid:146)s  main  focus  for  its  contribution,  towards  achieving  the  objective  of  the 
Convention as set out in its Article 2, is to reduce domestic emissions as much as possible. 
Albeit  Liechtenstein  is  already  highly  efficient  in  its  energy  use  some  costs  for  further 
reductions within the country would be unreasonably high. Therefore Liechtenstein aims 
at  the  supplemental  realization  of  emission  reductions  abroad.  To  that  respect 
Liechtenstein  emphasizes  to  invest  in  emission  reduction  projects  of  high  quality 
standards which besides the mitigation of greenhouse gases also lead to social, health and 
environmental benefits. Liechtenstein is of the view that encompassing domestic emission 
reductions  as  well  as  emission  reductions  achieved  abroad  by  its  INDC  states  the  most 
effective contribution to the objective described in Art. 2 of the UNFCCC. 

