<meta http-equiv='Content-Type' content='text/html; charset=utf-8'> 
              
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
                                         

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

                               Republic of Ghana 

GH - INDC  

 
 
 
 
 
 

                              

 

Ghana's intended nationally determined contribution 

(INDC) and accompanying explanatory note  

      

September, 2015 

1. Introduction 
In preparing and submitting its INDC, Ghana is mindful of its international obligations as a 
Party  to  the  UNFCCC  while  simultaneously  pursuing  a  national  development  agenda  that 
seeks  to  achieve  the  long-standing  objective  of  becoming  a  fully-fledged  middle-income 
economy. Ghana's response to the threats posed to this objective by the impacts of climate 
change has been to pursue coordinated domestic policy actions that in effect seek to develop 
a policy framework that integrates adaptation, mitigation and other climate related policies 
within broader development policies and planning in order to safeguard developmental gains 
from the impacts of climate change and build a climate resilient economy.   
 
At the multilateral level, Ghana reaffirms its resolve to support global efforts  to define a 
common future that seeks to safeguard the collective interest of all nations by supporting a 
global agreement that is fair, ambitious and balanced, respects the right of nations to pursue 
sustainable development,  and above all  gives equal opportunities  to all nations and their 
citizens, to pursue and realise their future aspirations.  
 
At the milestone 17th Session of the Conference of the Parties (COP) held in Durban, South 
Africa  in  December  2011,  the  Parties  decided  to  "develop  a  protocol,  another  legal 
instrument or an agreed outcome with legal  force under the Convention applicable to all 
Parties" for adoption at the twenty-first session of the COP and for it to come into effect 
and  be  implemented  from  2020.  Parties  agreed  that  their  work  will  address  inter  alia, 
mitigation,  adaptation,  finance,  technology  development  and  transfer,  transparency  of 
action and support, and capacity building.  
 
At COP 19 in Warsaw, Parties agreed to advance their work by focusing on the elements of 
the new agreement. The Warsaw Conference was also very significant in that for the first 
time in Decision 1/CP 19, Parties were invited to "initiate or intensify domestic preparations 
for  their  intended  nationally  determined  contributions  (INDCs),  without  prejudice  to  the 
legal nature of the contributions". The decision also requested the Ad Hoc Working Group 
on the Durban Platform for Enhanced Action to identify by the 20th session of the COP, the 
information  that  Parties  will  provide  when  putting  forward  their  contributions,  without 
prejudice  to  the  legal  nature  of  the  contributions.  Ghana  holds  the  view  that  the  INDCs 
should cover mitigation, adaptation, finance technology, capacity building and transparency 
and agrees with the common position of Africa that: 
 

*  The INDCs should conform fully with the Convention; 
*  Respect its differentiation between developed and developing countries; 
*  Build on established Convention obligations, particularly relating to means of 

implementation; and  

*  Enable developing countries, particularly, African countries, to fully 

participate in the global effort to achieve the Convention's objective, with 
regards to both mitigation and adaptation, in line with the Convention's 
provisions. 

 

Page 1 of 16 

Ghana's  INDC  builds  on  other  national  documents  prepared  and  submitted  to  the  United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in fulfilment of its obligations 
under  the  Convention.  These  include  the  National  Communications,  Biennial  Update 
Reports,  Nationally  Appropriate  Mitigation  Actions  (NAMAs)  and  Technology  Needs 
Assessment (TNAs). Ghana sees finance as an essential part of the whole INDC process. The 
scope  of  finance  from  the  developed  countries  must  address  mitigation,  adaptation,  and 
technology transfer and development in developing countries. It should not be solely focused 
on mitigation.  
 
Ghana as a Party to the UNFCCC and also to the Kyoto Protocol is committed to meeting its 
commitments in order to contribute its fair share to the attainment of the objective of the 
Convention.  In  view  of  this  and  in  accordance  with  Decisions  1/CP.19  and  1/CP.20,  the 
Republic of Ghana is pleased to communicate its INDC and associated explanatory note to 
facilitate the clarity, transparency, and understanding of our contribution. 

2. Ghana's contributions  
Based  on  its  national  circumstances,  Ghana  has  put  forward  mitigation  and  adaptation 
actions in its INDC. The inclusion of both mitigation and adaptation in the INDC resonate 
with the medium-term development agenda (Ghana Shared Growth Development Agenda II 
- GSGDA 2), the anticipated 40-year socio-economic transformational plan and the universal 
sustainable  development  goals.  In  all,  20  mitigation  and  11  adaptation  programme  of 
actions1 in 7 priority economic sectors are being proposed for implementation in the 10-
year  period  (2020-2030).  The  implementation  of  the actions  are expected  to help  attain 
low  carbon  climate  resilience  through  effective  adaptation  and  greenhouse  gas  (GHG) 
emission reduction in the following priority sectors:  
 

*  Sustainable land use including food security  
*  Climate proof infrastructure 
*  Equitable social development 
*  Sustainable mass transportation 
*  Sustainable energy security  
*  Sustainable forest management; and 
*  Alternative urban waste management.  

 

These  31  programme  of  actions  will  drive  the  strategic  focus  of  a  "10-year  post-2020 
enhanced climate action plan" that would be developed after Paris. In the 10-year period, 
Ghana needs USD 22.6 billion in investments from domestic and international public and 
private sources to finance these actions. USD 6.3 billion is expected to be mobilized from 
domestic sources whereas the USD 16.3 billion will come from international support.               

 
 

                                                      
1 "Programme of actions" are specific actions Ghana will implement in order to achieve the 
broad objectives set out in the "Policy actions" 

 

Page 2 of 16 

2.1 Mitigation goal 
Ghana's emission reduction goal is to unconditionally lower its GHG emissions by 15 percent 
relative to a business-as-usual (BAU) scenario emission of 73.95MtCO2e2 by 2030.   
 
An additional 30 percent emission reduction is attainable on condition that external support 
is  made  available  to  Ghana  to  cover  the  full  cost  of  implementing  the  mitigation  action 
(finance, technology transfer, capacity building). With this external support, a total emission 
reduction of 45% below the BUA emission levels can be achieved by 2030 (see figure 1).  
 
The following INDC policy actions3 will be implemented to achieve the mitigation goals  
 

Sectors 

INDC Policy Actions 

No. of 
Programme of 
Actions 

Energy 

Scale up renewable energy penetration by 10% by 2030 

Promote clean rural households lighting 
Expand the adoption of market-based cleaner cooking 
solutions 
Double energy efficiency improvement to 20% in power 
plants  

Transport  Scale up sustainable mass transportation  

AFOLU 

Waste 

Promote  Sustainable  utilization  of  forest  resources 
through REDD+ 
Adopt alternative urban solid waste management  

Industry   Double  energy  efficiency  improvement  to  20%  in 

industrial facilities 
Green Cooling Africa Initiative  

5 2 
1 

5 1 

 

 

2.1.1 Outlook of emissions trajectory up to 2030 
Without  prejudice  to  the  outcome  of  our  emission  reduction  goal,  the  outlook  of  Ghana's 
emission trajectory for 2020 to 2030 is projected as follows:  
 

*  Under BAU emissions are expected to rise from 19.53 MtCO2e in 2010 to 37.81 MtCO2e 

in 2020, to 53.5 MtCO2e in 2025 and 73.95MtCO2e in 2030. 

 

 

*  Under the unconditional emission reduction goal, emissions are expected to decrease 
by  12  percent  and  15  percent  relative  to  the  BAU  emission  levels  in  2025  and  2030 
respectively.  

                                                      
2 Million tonnes carbon dioxide equivalent 
3 Refer to the Annex 1 for the detail description on mitigation Policy actions and the 
Programme of actions that come with it. 

 

Page 3 of 16 

*  A similar emission trajectory is anticipated under the "conditional emission reduction 
goal"  except  that  the  degree  of  deviation  relative  to  the  BAU  emission  is  higher 
compared  to  the  projections  under  the  unconditional  goal.  Under  the  "conditional 
emission  reduction  goal",  emission  are  expected  to  decrease  by  27  percent  and  45 
percent relative to the BAU emissions in 2025 and 2030 respectively.  

 

2.1.2 Explanatory note on assumptions and methodology   
Base year 
Mid-year  
Target year 
Timeframe 

2010 
2025 
2030 
Time  of  implementation  of  emission  reduction  programmes  is  up  to  2030 
subject to review in 2025. 
Emission reductions from projected emissions resulting from the deviation 
of BAU emissions for the year 2030. 
Economy-wide 

Type of 
"Target" 
Scale  
Basket of gases  Carbon dioxide (CO2), Methane (CH4), and Nitrous Oxide (N2O). Abatement 
of fluorinated-gases (HFC-22 and HFC-410) from stationery air-conditioners 
is included. 
 100% of total national GHG emissions.  

% of emissions 
covered 
Sectors 
covered 
Baseline 
scenario 

Emission 
reduction 
scenario 

Global 
Warming 
Potential 
(GWP) 

Priority sectors: energy including transport, industrial process and product 
use, AFOLU and waste.  
Business as usual emissions4 estimated to be 73.95MtCO2e by 2030 starting 
from  baseline  emission  of  19.53MtCO2e  in  2010.  This  excludes  any  future 
developments  in  the  extractive  industry.  The  baseline  scenario  includes 
Ghana's intentions to explore opportunities using clean coal technology in 
public electricity generation mix to meet its energy security objectives. 
GHG  emission  projections  for  2030  starting  in  2010.  The  unconditional 
emission  reduction  goal 
implementation  of  2 
transformational mitigation actions5.  
the 
Whereas, 
implementation of 18 transformational mitigation actions (table 1) over the 
10-year (2020-2030) period. 
The  carbon  dioxide  equivalent  (CO2e)  was  calculated  using  the  100-year 
global warming potentials (CO2 = 1, CH4 = 21, N2O=310, HFC-22 =1,780 and 
HFC-410  =2,060)  in  accordance  with  the  IPCC  2nd  Assessment  Report.  The 
GWPs  were  used  on  the  national  GHG  inventory  to  establish  historical 
emission trend from 1990 to 2012.  

the  conditional  emission 

reduction  goal  assumes 

is  based  on  the 

                                                      
4 BAU is subject to revision before 2020.  
5  Ghana  is  mobilizing  $7.2billion  commercial  facility  to  develop  Sankofa-Gye  Nyame 
transformational gas project in partnership Vitol and ENI. Ghana takes note of this action as part 
of its unconditional contribution. Detail estimates of both GHG impacts and co-benefits will be 
provided before 2020. 

 

Page 4 of 16 

Contribution of 
International 
Market based 
mechanisms 

Methodology 
for estimating 
emission  

Ghana intends to generate compliance grade emission reductions units from 
actions in the waste and energy sectors and REDD+. Access to market-based 
mechanisms  where  these  emission  reduction  units  would  be  fungible  and 
tradable  forms  an  important  component  of  the  strategy  to  mobilize  long-
term  support  for  the  INDCs.  These  market-based  mechanisms  must  have 
robust  accounting  rules  and  standards,  avoid  double-counting  and  ensure 
environmental integrity. 
Historical  emission  trends  -  Historical  GHG  emissions  from  1990  to  2012 
were  estimated  using  the  2006  IPCC  guidelines.  The  2010  baseline  GHG 
emission was derived from the 22-year time series.  
 
Energy sector projections - The BAU and emission reduction scenarios for 
the  energy  sector  were  developed  for  the  sectors  using  the  "Long-range 
Energy Alternatives Planning System" (LEAP) software. The analysis was done 
using  data  from  the  strategic  national  energy  planning  exercise  by  the 
Energy  Commission  and  from  the  Ghana  Standard  Living  Survey  by  Ghana 
Statistics  Service.  Data  on  sectoral  activities,  economic  demographic  and 
technology penetration were derived from the sources named above.   
 
Industrial  sector  projections  -  A  comprehensive  modeling  approach  was 
used. The underlying assumptions of BAU and emission scenario were based 
on the following predictors: population, GDP, urbanization, electrification 
rate,  penetration  rate  of  domestic  refrigeration  and  annual  stocks  of  air-
conditioners.  
 
Waste  sector  projections  -  BAU  and  emission  reduction  scenarios  for  the 
waste  sector  were  generated  using  IPCC  waste  model.  Projection  was 
limited  to  methane  gas  management  in  engineered  landfills.  Data  on 
variation  in  urban  population,  efficiency  of  urban  waste  collection  and 
landfill gas recovery were based on national statistics. 
 
AFOLU  sector  projections  -  BAU  and  emission  scenarios  were  estimated 
based  on  IPCC  AFOLU  accounting  rules  using  COMAP6  tool  and  the  Forest 
Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) methodological framework. 
 

                                                      
6 Comprehensive mitigation assessment process, 1999. Ernest Orlando Lawrence Berkeley 
National Laboratory, United States of America.  

 

Page 5 of 16 

Conditional emission reduction trajectory

Unconditional emission reduction trajectory

Business as usual emissions

  Historical emissions 

 

15% 
 

30% 
 

 
 

)
e
2
O
C
t
M

(
 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
E

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

Figure 1:  Emission reduction trajectory  

 

Page 6 of 16 

2.2 Adaptation Goal  
The long-term goal of Ghana's adaptation is to  increase climate resilience and decrease 
vulnerability  for  enhanced  sustainable  development.  Adaptation  under  Ghana's  INDC  is 
informed by:  

*  good governance and inter-sectoral coordination,  
*  capacity-building, the role of science, technology and innovation, 
*  adequate finance from both domestic sources and international cooperation,  
*  promoting outreach by informing, communicating and educating the citizenry; and 
*  adhering to accountable monitoring and reporting.  

 
The following priority adaptation policy actions will be implemented in order to  achieve 
Ghana's INDC adaptation goal.    
 

Sector 

Strategic Area 

INDC Policy Actions 

No of 
Programme of 
Actions 
3 1 Agriculture  and  food 
security 
Sustainable forest 
resource management 
Resilient 
Infrastructure in built 
environment 

Climate change and 
health 
Water resources  

Sustainable 
land use 

Climate 
resilient 
strategic 
infrastructure 
Equitable 
social 
development 

Agriculture resilience building in 
climate vulnerable landscapes 
Value  addition-based  utilization  of 
forest resources 
City-wide resilient infrastructure 
planning 
Early warning and disaster 
prevention 
Managing climate-induced health 
risk 
Integrated 
management  
Resilience  for  Gender  and  the 
Vulnerable 

resources 

water 

Gender and the 
vulnerable  
 
Some  of  the  priority  adaptation  policy  actions  we  have  presented  will  yield  positive 
synergies with mitigation policy actions7. 
 
                                                      
7 Refer to the Annex 2 for the detail description on adaptation policy actions 

 

Page 7 of 16 

3. Means of Implementation   

3.1 Investment Requirements 
In the 10-year period, Ghana intends to mobilize nearly USD 22.6 billion investment from 
both domestic and international public and private sources. USD 6.3 billion domestically 
(28.3%  of  total  investment)  will  be  mobilized  nationally  whereas  the  USD  16  billion  will 
come from international support. 
 
Out of the USD 22.6 billion investment, USD  9.81 billion (representing 45 % of the total 
investment)  is  needed  for  mitigation  whereas  the  remaining  USD  12.79  billion8  will  be 
required for adaptation.  
 
For mitigation, the USD 9.81 billion is the total investment cost for implementing the 20 
transformational mitigation actions over the 10-year period (2020-2030). Out of the USD 
9.81  billion,  Ghana  will  mobilize  USD  2.02  billion  (21%  of  the  total  investment  cost)  to 
finance  the  two  unconditional  INDCs.  An  additional  USD  7.79  billion  will  be  needed  to 
finance the remaining 18 mitigation actions in order to achieve more ambitious emission 
reductions in the 10 year period.  
 
For  Adaptation,  Ghana  will  mobilize  USD  4.21  billion  (34%)  at  the  national  level.  The 
remaining USD 8.29 billion is the international contribution Ghana is looking for in order to 
meet the cost of implementing its adaptation actions.  

 

3.2 Sources of Finance  
No 

Sources 

Domestic sources 
1 

National Budget 
3 

Corporate Social Responsibility  

Commercial facilities  

International sources 
3 

Green climate fund  

Other multilateral funds 

Bilateral agreements 

Private capital investment 

International carbon market  
5 
7 

Total  

 

Indicative Amounts  
(Billion) - ($) 

% of total investment  

1.4 

1.7 

3.2 

5.0 

1.1 

2.8 

3.8 

3.6 

22.6 

6.2 

7.5 

14.2 

22.1 

4.9 

12.4 

16.8 

15.9 

100 

                                                      
8 The cost of adaptation is indicative. Revised cost from financial analysis will be presented 
before 2020 

 

Page 8 of 16 

3.3 Technology and Capacity Needs 
Without  the  requisite  technology,  the  technical  capacity  and  favorable  conditions  that 
stimulate innovation, Ghana will not have the capability to fully implement its INDC. In 
this regard, Ghana will be looking for international partnerships to take advantage of the 
opportunities  for  technology  development  and  transfer  and  continuous  up-skilling 
especially in the priority INDC sectors.  

 

4. Monitoring Report and Verification (MRV) 
Ghana  recognizes  that  an  MRV  system  is  the  cornerstone  to  ensure  the  successful 
implementation of its INDC mitigation and adaptation actions.  
 
Ghana's  MRV  system  for  the  INDC  will  be  an  integral  part  of  the  existing  national 
development  monitoring  and  evaluation  structures  which  incorporates  sector-based 
periodic information review through Annual Progress Report (APR) system.  The MRV for 
the INDC will build on the existing APR system by enhancing the technical functionalities 
and  with  proper  institutional  coordination.  This  will  bring  about  transparency  and 
accountability in the implementation of Ghana's INDC actions.  
 
The MRV system will be deployed to track progress towards achieving INDC goals as well 
as any modifications in the priority policy actions that will be implemented to attain the 
INDC goals that have been put forward. 

 

5. Fairness and Ambition  
Ghana is of the view that the mitigation and adaptation actions in the INDC it has put 
forward  represents  a  reasonable  level  of  responsibility  it  can  take  as  its  share  of  the 
global effort taking into account its socio-economic circumstances. In this regard,  Ghana 
considers its INDC to be fair and ambitious for 4 main reasons: 
 

*  Ghana  undertakes,  for  the  first  time,  a  formal  emission  reduction  obligation  to 
control the growth of its GHG emissions, despite having only emitted 0.1% of global 
GHG emissions in 20129. 
 

*  With Ghana's GHG emissions per capita of 1.3tCO2e10, the full implementation of 
both unconditional and conditional mitigation contribution will lead to a 0.5 tCO2e 
reduction in the country's per capita emissions to 0.8tCO2e by 2030. 
 

*  As a developing country, the lack of fiscal space to finance priority issues including 
poverty  reduction  policies  including  investments  in  education,  health  and  basic 
infrastructure  constrains  the  country's  effort  to  finance  and  implement  climate 
mitigation and adaptation policies. 

                                                      
9 CAIT 3.0 WIR's climate data explorer (http://cait.wri.org).  
10 Emissions included AFOLU sector.  

Page 9 of 16 

 

 

*  With  the  kind  of  urgent  development  Ghana  needs  and  the  level  risk  climate 
change poses to the strategic sectors of its economy such as agriculture, water, 
infrastructure  etc,  Ghana  must  focus  on  reducing  the  risk  of  climate  change 
impacts.  

6. National Planning Process   
Ghana's INDC was prepared through a comprehensive and participatory process with high-
level cabinet approval.  
 
The INDC is anchored in the anticipated 40-year long-term development, the GSGDA II, 
National Climate Change Policy as well as the Low Carbon Development Strategy. Many 
national  policies,  laws  and  regulation  will  support  implementation  in  the  first  10-year 
period and beyond with the possibility of mid-term review in 2025.  
 
The  proposed  measures  to  achieve  the  INDC  goal  will  build  on  existing  measures  and 
strategies.  The  existing  legal  frameworks  will  have  to  be  revised  accordingly.  These 
revisions are subject to approval by Ghana's Parliament. Details of the national policies 
and measures that will support the implementation of the INDC are presented in Annex 1 
and Annex 2.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Page 10 of 16 

Annex 1: Mitigation Policy Actions and emission reduction actions11  
Status  

Programme of Action    

INDC Policy 
Actions 

Additional Information 

 

Supporting national policy  & 
measures 

Conditional  

Scale up 
renewable 
energy 
penetration by 
10% by 2030 

Increase small-medium hydro installed 
capacity up to 150-300MW  

Attain utility scale wind power capacity up 
to 50-150MW 

Attain utility scale solar electricity 
installed capacity up to 150-250MW 

Establish solar 55 mini-grids with an 
average capacity of 100kW which 
translates to 10MW 
Scale up the 200,000 solar home systems 
for lighting in urban and selected non-
electrified rural households 
Increase solar lantern replacement in rural 
non-electrified households to 2 million. 

Promote clean 
rural 
households 
lighting  

*  National Energy Policy 
*  National renewable energy 

Act (Act 832). 

*  Set up feed-in-tariff for 

renewable energy 
technologies. 

*  Established of national 
renewable energy fund 

*  Design renewable energy 

purchase obligation. 

*  Net metering scheme for 

households 

* 

Sustainable Energy Action 
Plan  

*  National bioenergy 

strategy 

*  Phasing out fossil fuel 

subsidies 

Investment 
Needs         
(mil $) 
2,214 

Co-benefits 

*  Job creation opportunities 

through installation and 
maintenance of about 127.5 
million man hours. 

*  Reduced  consumption  of  fossil 
for  power 

fuel  consumption 
generation. 

*  Increased electricity access to 

rural communities and 
contributed to realize energy 
security. 

*  The electricity demand saving of 

about 200MW 

300 

*  Avoided GH¢74 million subsidy 

on kerosene annually.  

*  Kerosene savings to the nation 

of 60,000liters, 150,000liters 
and 390,000liters. 

                                                      
11 Mitigation actions were selected based on the following key considerations. (1) Government is commitment (policy and financial wise) to get 
mitigation actions implemented and alignment with government priorities; (2) Enough baseline data exist with clear set targets that can be used 
for the GHG emissions modeling and assessment of co-benefits; (3) It is possible to estimate investment requirements( estimate pragmatic and 
reasonable budget) with clear sources of funding; (4) It is possible to estimate sustainable development benefits of the actions; (5) Technology 
and know-how are available to be deployed in the Ghanaian market; (6) Mitigation actions are already part of the list of 55 NAMAs submitted to 
the UNFCCC in 2010 and (7) There are existing analytical tools that can be adapted to suit Ghana's unique national circumstance.  

 

Page 11 of 16 

Expand the 
adoption of 
market-based 
cleaner 
cooking 
solutions  

Scale up adoption of LPG use from 5.5% to 
50% peri-urban and rural households up to 
2030. 
Scale up access and adoption of 2 million 
efficient cook stoves up to 2030 

* 

Sustainable Energy Action 
Plan  

*  National Natural Gas 

Master Plan. 

*  National LPG Programme 

0.6 

50 

* 

39,500 hectares of woodland is 
saved from degradation. 

*  Reduction in indoor pollution 

resulting from wood fuel usage. 

*  Reduction in  smoke related 
respiratory and eye diseases 

*  Reduction in household cooking 

* 

fuel expenditure 
Job creation through the 
manufacture and sale of the 
efficient stoves 

Double energy 
efficiency 
improvement 
to 20% in 
power plants 

Scale up 120 MSCF12 natural gas 
replacement of light crude oil for 
electricity generation in thermal plants. 

*  National Natural Gas 

Unconditional 

1,000 

*  Depending on demand 

Master Plan. 
 

scenarios, savings are estimated 
to be between US$67 million 
and US$610 million.  

*  Projected fuel cost savings over 

* 

the lifetime of the project are 
expected to be between US$94 
million and US$109 million, 
based on the mid-level gas 
demand projection. 
Income tax - Projected income 
taxes to be paid by WAPCo to 
Ghana over the lifetime of the 
project is in the range of 
US$466 million to US$588 
million. 

Scale up 
Sustainable 
mass 
transportation  

Expansion of inter and intra city mass 
transportation modes (Rail and bus transit 
system) in 4 cities 13    

National Transport Policy  

Conditional 

1,201 

*  Number of trips by public 

transportation increased by 10% 
in the 4 cities. 

*  Number of NMT trips increase 

by 5% in intervened areas. 

                                                      
12 Million standard cubic feet  
13 This is a flagship transformational change INDC action but it is not included in the mitigation actions. Detail analysis on the scope and scale 
of the action will be provided before 2020.  

 

Page 12 of 16 

Promote 
Sustainable 
utilization of 
forest 
resources 
through REDD+ 

 

Continue 10,000ha annual 
reforestation/afforestation of degraded 
lands 
Double 10,000ha annual 
reforestation/afforestation of degraded 
lands translating to 20,000ha on annual 
basis. 
Support enhancement of forest carbon 
stocks through 5,000ha per annum 
enrichment planting and enforcement of 
timber felling standards. 
45%14 emission reduction through result-
based emission reduction programme in 
cocoa landscape. 

National Forest and Wildlife 
Policy. 
 
National plantation 
development strategy 
 

National Forest and Wildlife 
Policy. 
Timber resource utilization 
regulation  
National Forest and Wildlife 
Policy 
 
National REDD+ strategy 

Wildfire management in the transition and 
savannah dry lands in Ghana 

*  Reduction in travel time by at 

least 8 minutes per trip by 
public transport. 

*  Traffic congestion levels 

decreased. 

*  Annual 29,000 jobs created. 
*  Annual production of 370 metric 

ton of staple food  

Unconditional 

1,050 

Conditional 

1,750 

Conditional 

60 

*  Biodiversity conservation   

Conditional 

2,067 

* 

* 

Increase 20,000 cocoa farmer 
incomes by doubling the 
average yield per hectare. 
In  reducing  deforestation  and 
degradation,  the  program  will 
help  to  maintain  and  conserve 
the  biodiversity  that  is  found 
within 
cocoa-forest 
landscape. 

the 

Conditional 

26 

*  Reduce emissions of short-lived 

climate pollutants. 

*  Reduce deforestation and 

improve biodiversity 
conservation especially in the 
drylands. 
Improve degraded lands for 
productive use.   

* 

                                                      
14 Provisional targets. Forest reference level is limited to avoided deforestation. New estimates will be submitted before 2020.  

 

Page 13 of 16 

Improve effectiveness of urban solid 
collection from 70% to 90% by 2030 and 
disposed all to an engineered landfills for 
phase-out methane recovery from 40% in 
2025 to 65% by 2030 
Scale up 200 institutional biogas in senior 
high schools and prisons nation wide 
Double the current waste to compost 
installed capacity of 180,000tonne/annum 
by 203015.     

Scaling up of installation of power factor 
correction devices in 1,000 commercial and 
industrial facilities (capacitor banks). 

Adopt 
alternative 
urban solid 
waste 
management  

Double energy 
efficiency 
improvement 
to 20% in 
industrial 
facilities   

* National sanitation strategy. 
* National bioenergy strategy. 
* National renewable energy 

Act (Act 832) 

* Environmental Protection 

Act (Act 490) 

* Environmental Assessment 

Regulation (LI. 1652)  

* Sustainable Energy Action 

Plan. 

*  National Energy Policy 
*  Power factor surcharge 

for bulk electricity 
consumers. 
Sustainable Energy Action 
Plan. 

* 

Conditional 

15 
60 

* 

* 

* 

Job creation of about 9 million 
man hours for 15 years based 
250 people working for 8 hours 
/day. 
Improved urban sanitation and 
waste management. 
Improved agricultural yield 
through the availability of 
organic fertilizer. 

*  Reduced inorganic fertilizer 

bill to government 

Conditional 

8.4 

*  Reduction 

in 

electricity 

demands and expenditure. 
Direct  electricity  cost  saving  to 
consumers.  With  an  average 
monthly  maximum 
demand 
savings  of  $  300  avoided  power 
factor surcharge.  

Green Cooling 
Africa 
Initiative   

Abatement of fluorinated-gases (HFC-22 
and HFC-410) from stationery air-
conditioners 

*  National ODS phase-out 

Conditional 

0.3 

*  Phase-out 

ozone 

depleting 

programme. 

*  Management of ODS and 
product regulation, 2005 
(LI. 1812) 

substances. 

                                                      
15 Detail analysis on the scope and scale will be provided before 2020.  
 

 

 

Page 14 of 16 

Annex 2: Adaptation Policy Actions 

INDC Policy Actions  

Programme of Actions   

Agriculture resilience 
building in climate 
vulnerable landscapes 

Modified community-based conservation agriculture adopted 
in 43 administrative districts 

Scale up penetration of climate smart technologies to 
increase livestock and fisheries productivity by 10%.   

Promote innovations in post-harvest storage and food 
processing and forest products in 43 administrative districts.    

Value addition-based 
utilization of forest 
resources  

Governance reform for utilization of forest resources for 
sustainable energy use and biodiversity business.   

Manage 413,000ha fragile, ecologically sensitive and culturally 
significant sites in 22 administrative district in the forest and 
savannah areas.  

City-wide resilient 
infrastructure planning  

Building standards for strategic infrastructure in housing, 
transport, coastal, waste management, telecommunication 
and energy) adopted in 10 urban administrative regions. 

Early warning and 
disaster prevention 

Managing climate-
induced health risks 

Integrated water 
resources management   
Resilience for gender 
and the vulnerable 

Expand and modernize the current 22 synoptic stations based 
on needs assessment, and increase the number to 50 stations 
for efficient weather information management 
Strengthen climate related disease surveillance in vulnerable 
communities in 3 Districts. 
Adopt climate change informed health information systems 
including traditional knowledge on health risk management. 
Strengthen equitable distribution and access to water for 20% 
of the population living in climate change risk communities. 
Implementation of community led adaptation and livelihood 
diversification for vulnerable groups  

Supporting national policy  & 
measures 
Food and Agriculture Sector 
Development Policy 
 
Ghana's Medium-term 
Agriculture sector investment 
plan  
 
Ghana Agriculture Investment 
Programme 
National bio-energy strategy. 
 
Sustainable energy for all action 
plan 
 
National Forest and Wildlife 
Policy 
Local Government Act 462. 
 
National Building Regulation 

Ghana Meteorological Agency 
Act 682.  

National Health Policy 

Investment Needs      

Status 

(mil $) 

799 

1,119 
 

1,270 
 

767 

512 

Unconditional  

Unconditional 

Conditional  

Unconditional 

Unconditional 

3,558 

Conditional 

403 

919 

492 

Conditional 

Conditional 

Unconditional 

National Water Policy  

1,919 

Unconditional 

National climate change policy 

1,023 

Unconditional 

 

 

Page 15 of 16 

