<meta http-equiv='Content-Type' content='text/html; charset=utf-8'> 

 

MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 

 

 

Kenya's Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) 

23 July 2015 

1.  Introduction 

Kenya,  like  other  countries  in  the  region,  is  bearing  the  brunt  of  climate  change  impacts 
and  the  associated  socio-economic  losses.  The  situation  is  exacerbated  by  the  high 
dependence on climate sensitive natural resources. In response to the challenges posed by 
Climate  Change,  Kenya  has  developed  a  National  Climate  Change  Response  Strategy 
(NCCRS  2010),  National  Climate  Change  Action  Plan  (NCCAP  2013),  and  a  National 
Adaptation  Plan  (NAP)  -  under  preparation  which  provides  a  vision  for  low  carbon  and 
climate resilient development pathway, while a National Climate Change Framework Policy 
and  legislation  are  in  their  final  stages  of  enactment  to  facilitate  effective  response  to 
climate  change.  Kenya 
is  operationalising  these  policies  and  plans  through  the 
implementation  of  climate  change  actions  in  various  areas  such  as  afforestation  and 
reforestation,  geothermal  and  other  clean  energy  development,  energy  efficiency,  climate 
smart agriculture, and drought management. 

This  document  presents  Kenya's  Intended  Nationally  Determined  Contribution  (INDC)  in 
response to decisions adopted at the 19th and 20th sessions of the Conference of the Parties 
to  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change  (UNFCCC);  that  invite 
Parties  to  communicate  to  the  Secretariat  their  INDCs,  towards  achieving  the  objective  of 
the UNFCCC as set out in Article 2 of the Convention. 

Kenya's INDC builds on the participatory multi-stakeholder and cross-sectoral consultative 
processes during the development of NCCRS and NCCAP at national and county levels. The 
contribution will also contribute towards the delivery of the Constitution of Kenya and the 
attainment of Vision 2030, the country's development blueprint. 

1.1 National Circumstances 

Kenya  is  located  in  the  Greater  Horn  of  Africa  region,  which  is  highly  vulnerable  to  the 
impacts of climate change. More than 80% of the country's landmass is arid and semi-arid 
land  (ASAL)  with  poor  infrastructure,  and  other  developmental  challenges.  The  country's 
economy is highly dependent on climate sensitive sectors such as agriculture that is mainly 
rain-fed,  energy,  tourism,  water  and  health.  Climate  hazards  have  caused  considerable 
losses  across  the  country's  different  sectors  over  the  years.  The  main  climate  hazards 
include droughts and floods which cause economic losses estimated at 3% of the country's 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP). 

Kenya's total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are relatively low, standing at 73 MtCO2eq 
in 2010, out of which 75% are from the land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) 
and  agriculture  sectors.  This  may  be  explained  by  the  reliance  on  wood  fuel  by  a  large 
proportion of the population coupled with the increasing demand for agricultural land and 

 

 

 

 

MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 

 
urban  development.  The  other  significant  emissions  are  from  the  energy  and  transport 
sectors, with the waste and industrial processes contributing negligible amounts. 

 

Kenya  strives  to  be  a  newly  industrialised  middle  income  country  by  2030.  This 
development is expected to increase emissions from the energy sector.  The current energy 
mix,  however,  is  mainly  clean  with  deliberate  efforts  by  Government  towards  enhancing 
geothermal, wind, solar and other clean energy development.  

Climate change impacts continue to slow down the attainment of its national development 
goals.  Kenya  will  continue  making  investments  with  both  domestic  and  international 
resources to adapt to climate change and realise its abatement potentials.  

 

2.  Contribution 

Kenya's INDC includes  both  mitigation and adaptation  components based on  her national 
circumstances and in line with decisions 1/CP.19 and 1/CP.20.  

2.1 Mitigation 

Kenya  aims  to  achieve  a  low  carbon, 
climate resilient development pathway.  

Kenya  will  continue  to  implement  the 
NCCAP  (2013-2017),  and  subsequent 
action  plans  beyond  this  period  to 
achieve this target. This will include the 
promotion  and  implementation  of  the 
following mitigation activities.  

*  Expansion  in  geothermal,  solar 
and  wind  energy  production, 
other  renewables  and  clean 
energy options. 

Kenya  seeks 
to  undertake  an  ambitious 
mitigation  contribution  towards  the  2015 
Agreement. Kenya therefore seeks to abate its 
GHG  emissions  by  30%  by  2030  relative  to 
the  BAU  scenario  of  143  MtCO2eq;  and  in 
line with its sustainable development agenda.  
This is also subject to international support in 
the  form  of  finance,  investment,  technology 
development  and 
transfer,  and  capacity 
building. 

*  Enhancement of Energy and resource efficiency across the different sectors. 

*  Make  progress  towards  achieving  a  tree  cover  of  at  least  10%  of  the  land  area  of 

Kenya.  

*  Clean energy technologies to reduce overreliance on wood fuels.  

*  Low carbon and efficient transportation systems. 

*  Climate smart agriculture (CSA) in line with the National CSA Framework.  

*  Sustainable waste management systems. 

 

 

 

 

MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 

 

 

 

2.1.1  Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding 
Timeframe for 
implementation  

The timeframe for implementation of the INDC is up to 2030.  

Scope of gases 
included in the 
contribution 
Sectors covered by 
the contribution 

Carbon  dioxide  (CO2),  Methane  (CH4),  and  Nitrous  Oxide  (N2O) 
are prioritised. 

The  IPCC  Guidelines  for  all  sectors:  Energy,  Transportation, 
Industrial  Processes,  Agriculture,  Forestry  and  Other  Land  Use 
(AFOLU) and waste sector. 

Assumptions and methodological approaches  

Methodology for 
emissions 
accounting  

The  IPCC  Revised  1996  Guidelines  for  National  Greenhouse  Gas 
Inventories  and  the  Good  Practise  Guidance  and  Uncertainty 
Management in National Greenhouse Gas Inventories were used to 
calculate  the  GHG  emissions  and  removals  as  described  in  the 
Second  National  Communication.  Emissions  of  carbon  dioxide 
from  the  combustion  of  biomass  are  assessed  but  not  counted 
towards the contribution. 

Future  contribution  from  the  extractive  sector  has  not  been 
included in the accounting. 

Global warming 
potentials 

The carbon dioxide equivalent was calculated using the 100 year 
global  warming  potentials  in  accordance  with  the  IPCC  2nd 
Assessment Report. 

Approaches to land 
sector emissions  

This  includes  emissions  from  the  land  use,  land-use  change  and 
forestry  (LULUCF)  sector.  Relevant  national  policy  documents 
and the  FAO's Global  Forest  Resource  Assessment  2010  for 
Kenya were  used. A  global  land-use  data  approach was  used,  as 
described in the 2003 IPCC Good Practice Guidance for LULUCF. 
 A state  and  transition  model  consistent  with  the  1996  Revised 
IPCC  Guidelines  was  used  to calculate  fluxes  of  CO2 to  (or  from) 
the atmosphere and biomass carbon pools is the same as outlined 
in 
is  significant 
uncertainty in the BAU emission and mitigation potential estimates 
for this sector and work is underway to update and improve these 
estimates. 

the 1996  Revised  IPCC  Guidelines.  There 

Contribution of 
International 

Kenya  does  not  rule  out  the  use  of  international  market-based 
mechanisms in line with agreed accounting rules. 

 

 

 

 

MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 

 

Business-as-usual  (BAU)  emissions  are  estimated  to  be  143 
MtCO2eq)  by  2030.  This  excludes  future  exploitation  in  the 
extractive sector. 

The BAU projection methodology is detailed within the NCCAP and 
the  Second  National  Communication  (SNC), 
including  key 
assumptions,  drivers  and  methodologies  for  each  sector.  The  base 
year is 2010. For geothermal energy, note that the BAU projection 
contained in the NCCAP and SNC has been revised to be consistent 
with the current level of geothermal deployment since the NCCAP 
was published.   

 
Market Based 
Mechanism 

Reference Point 

BAU emissions in 
the target year 

BAU projection 
methodology  

 

2.2  Adaptation 

As  a  minimal  contributor  to  global  GHG  emissions,  Kenya  places  significant  priority  on 
adapting to the effects of climate change.  

 

2.2.1  Programme of action for adaptation 

adaptation 

actions 

the  NCCAP  and 

The  priority 
are 
presented 
in 
further 
elaborated in the NAP. The actions are based 
on risk and vulnerability assessments across 
the  MTP  sectors.  Many  of  the  actions  have 
strong  synergies  with  mitigation  actions. 
Kenya's  capacity 
strong 
mitigation  actions 
is  dependent  upon 
support  for  the  implementation  of  these 
adaptation actions. 

to  undertake 

Kenya  will  ensure  enhanced  resilience  to 
climate  change  towards  the  attainment  of 
Vision  2030  by  mainstreaming  climate 
change  adaptation  into  the  Medium  Term 
Plans (MTPs) and implementing adaptation 
actions. Any reasonable achievement of the 
adaptation  goal  will  require  financial, 
technology and capacity building support. 

*  MTP SECTOR 

*  PRIORITY ADAPTATION ACTIONS  

*  Energy 

* 

Increase the resilience of current and future energy systems. 

*  Science,  Technology  and 

*  Support innovation and development of appropriate technologies that 

innovations 

promote climate resilient development. 

 

 

 

 

MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 

 

 

*  MTP SECTOR 

*  PRIORITY ADAPTATION ACTIONS  

Public sector reforms 

Integrate climate change adaptation into the public sector reforms.  

*  Human Resource 

*  Enhance  adaptive  capacity  and  resilience  of  the  informal  private 

Development, Labour and 
Employment 

sector. 

* 

Infrastructure 

*  Climate proofing of infrastructure (energy, transport, buildings, ICT). 

*  Land Reforms 

*  Mainstream climate change adaptation in land reforms. 

Education and training 

Enhance  education,  training,  public  awareness,  public  participation, 
public  access  to  information  on  climate  change  adaptation  across 
public and private sectors.  

Health 

Strengthen  integration  of  climate  change  adaptation  into  the  health 
sector. 

Environment 

Enhance climate information services. 

Enhance  the  resilience  of  ecosystems  to  climate  variability  and 
change. 

Water and irrigation 

Mainstream  of  climate  change  adaptation  in  the  water  sector  by 
implementing the National Water Master Plan (2014). 

Population,  urbanisation 
and housing 

Enhance  the  adaptive  capacity  of  the  population,  urbanisation  and 
housing sector. 

Gender, 
Groups and Youth 

Vulnerable 

Strengthen  the  adaptive  capacity  of  the  most  vulnerable  groups  and 
communities through social safety nets and insurance schemes. 

Tourism 

Enhance the resilience of the tourism value chain. 

Agriculture, 
livestock 
development and fisheries 

Enhance the resilience of the agriculture, livestock and fisheries value 
chains  by  promoting  climate  smart  agriculture  and 
livestock 
development. 

Sector/ 

Private 
Trade; 
Manufacturing;  Business 
Process 
Outsourcing, 
Financial services 

Create  enabling  environment  for  the  resilience  of  private  sector 
investment, demonstrate an operational business case. 

Oil and mineral resources 

Integrate climate change adaptation into the extractive sector. 

Devolution 

Mainstream  climate  change  adaptation 
integrated 
development  plans  and  implement  the  Ending  Drought  Emergencies 
Strategy.  

into  county 

 

 

 

 

 

MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 

 
 

 

3.  Fairness and ambition  

Kenya  believes  that  the  key  factors  in  determining  the  fairness  of  a  contribution  should 
include  historical  responsibility  and  respective  capability  to  address  climate  change.  The 
UNFCCC  also  recognises  that  the  extent  to  which  developing  countries  will  meet  their 
obligations under the Convention will depend on the  level of support in terms of finance, 
technology and capacity building available.  

Kenya's historical contribution is low, at 0.1% of the total global emissions, while the per-
capita  emissions  are  less  than  1.26  MtCO2eq  compared  to  the  global  average  of  7.58 
MtCO2eq 1. 

The  country's  capability  to  implement  this  contribution  is  also  subject  to  limitations;  with 
poverty  alleviation  and  sustainable  economic  development  being  the  key  national 
objectives. Increasing the per-capita GDP growth equitably above the current levels of 4.1% 
is therefore a priority. 

Nevertheless, Kenya places a high priority on response to climate change.  In order to meet 

the  below  2 C  objective,  all  countries  will  need  to  undertake  mitigation  based  on  the 
common  but  differentiated  responsibilities  and  respective  capabilities  in  accordance  with 
the  Convention.  In  addition,  Kenya  particularly  notes  that  the  Lima  Call  to  Action  agrees 
that each Party's contribution will "represent a progression beyond the current undertaking 
of that Party". 

Kenya is determined to continue playing a leadership role in addressing climate change by 
communicating a fair and ambitious contribution. This intended contribution targets a high 
proportion of its mitigation potential, dependent on the level of support available. This will 
involve  implementing  the  priority  mitigation  and  adaptation  actions  in  the  NCCAP  to 
achieve a low carbon climate resilient development in line with Vision 2030.  

This  is  the  first  time  that  Kenya  has  stated  an  intended  contribution  to  global  mitigation 
efforts.  In  addition,  Kenya's  INDC  represents  her  aspiration  to  increase  the  resilience  to 
climate  change  by  introducing  a  comprehensive  programme  for  adaptation  action  across 
sectors  in  support  of  livelihoods,  and  economic  well-being  of  the  Kenyan  people.  This 
represents a high level of fairness and ambition in light of Kenya's national circumstances. 

 

4.  Planning process 

Kenya's planning process on mitigation and adaptation hinges on the NCCAP and the NAP. 
The two shall be reviewed every five years to inform the  MTP. The adaptation actions are 
                                                           
1 GHG time series 1990-2012 per capita emissions for world countries 
http://edgar.jrc.ec.europa.eu/overview.php?v=GHGts_pc1990-2012 

 

 

 

 

MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 

 

 
further amplified in the NAP. Mitigation and adaptation actions are implemented across the 
various  sectors  at  both  the  national  and  county  government  levels.  The  Ministry  of 
Environment  and  Natural  Resources  coordinates  the  country's  climate  change  affairs 
through the National Climate Change Secretariat (NCCS).  

The planning process also takes cognisance of the Climate Change Bill (2014) that proposes 
several  institutional  reforms  to  enhance  coordination  of  climate  change  adaptation  and 
mitigation. These include the establishment of:  

*  A high level National Climate Change Council chaired by the President. The Council 
shall provide an overarching national climate change coordination mechanism and, 
among  other  roles,  ensure  the  mainstreaming  of  climate  change  functions  by  the 
National and County governments, and approve and oversee the implementation of 
the NCCAP. 

* 

 A  Climate  Change  Directorate  as  the  lead  agency  of  the  government  on  national 
climate  change  plans  and  actions  to  deliver  operational  coordination;  and  provide 
technical  assistance  on  climate  change  actions  and  responses 
to  County 
governments. 

*  Kenya  Climate  Fund  to  be  a  financing  mechanism  for  priority  climate  change 

actions and interventions approved by the Council. 

In  addressing  climate  change  issues,  public  entities  are  required  to  undertake  public 
awareness  and  consultations,  and  ensure  gender  mainstreaming,  in  line  with  the 
Constitution and the Climate Change Bill (2014). 

 

5.  Means of implementation 

Kenya's  contribution  will  be  implemented  with  both  domestic  and  international  support. 
It is  estimated  that  over  USD  40  billion  is  required  for  mitigation  and  adaptation  actions 
across  sectors  up  to  2030.  Kenya  will  require  international  support  in  form  of  finance, 
investment, technology development and transfer, and capacity-building to fully realize her 
intended contribution. Further analysis will be necessary to refine the required investment 
cost and determine the domestic support.  

 

 

