<meta http-equiv='Content-Type' content='text/html; charset=utf-8'>REPUBLIC OF NIGER 

Fraternity - Labor - Progress 

 

«Intended Nationally Determined 

Contribution (INDC) » of Niger 

September, 26th, 2015 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

1. 

SUMMARY OF THE NIGER INDC ................................................................................................................. 1 

2.  NATIONAL CONDITIONS ............................................................................................................................. 4 

3. 

PRIORITY SECTORS ..................................................................................................................................... 5 

4.  MITIGATION COMPONENT ........................................................................................................................ 5 

4.1.  General objectives ............................................................................................ 5 

4.2.  Reference scenario........................................................................................... 6 

4.3.  Conditional and unconditional mitigation measures ........................................ 8 

4.4.  Ambition and fairness .................................................................................... 10 

4.5.  Method used to estimate emissions .............................................................. 10 

5. 

ADAPTATION COMPONENT ..................................................................................................................... 11 

5.1. 

Justification of the component....................................................................... 11 

5.2. 

Impacts of climate change and Niger's vulnerability ...................................... 11 

5.3.  National Priorities for Adaptation to Climate Change .................................... 11 

5.4.  Niger's initiatives supporting adaptation ....................................................... 11 

5.5.  Adaptation measures ..................................................................................... 12 

5.6.  Co-benefits ..................................................................................................... 12 

5.7.  Accent on Climate-Smart Agriculture ............................................................. 13 

6. 

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INDC .............................................................................................................. 13 

6.1. 

Institutional structure .................................................................................... 13 

6.2.  Obstacles and gaps......................................................................................... 14 

7. 

THE COUNTRY'S NEEDS ............................................................................................................................ 14 

7.1.  Financial support ............................................................................................ 14 

7.2.  Technology transfer ....................................................................................... 14 

7.3.  Capacity building ............................................................................................ 15 

7.4.  Follow-up, evaluation and management ........................................................ 15 

8. 

ANNEXES .................................................................................................................................................. 16 

8.1.  Annexe 1 : Abbreviations and acronyms ........................................................ 16 

8.2.  Annex 2 : Projected annual benefits and costs of adaptation measures ........ 17 

8.3.  Annex  3 :  Projected  areas  in  sustainable  land  management  (SLM)  for  the 
INDC  19 

 

 

 
 

SUMMARY OF THE NIGER INDC 

National 
circumstances 

-  Population: 17.7 millions (80% rural, 20% urban) inhabitants. 
-  Population  growth  rate:  3,9%  (General  Census  of  Population 

and Dwellings (RGPH), 2011). 

-  Low  GDP,  US  $6,303.5  million  in  2015  (National  Institute  of 
Statistics)  (INS),  or  US  $413  per  inhabitant,  with  an  agriculture 
sector  that  contributes  80%  to  the  income  of  the  populations 
and is very dependent on climatic risks. 

Losses 
damage 

and 

-  Average losses due to drought: more than US $70 million. 
-  Damage  to  the  economy  from  floods  for  the  2000's:  US  $18 

million. 

National 
objectives 

for 
reference 

Emissions 
the 
year 

Coverage  and 
scope  of 
the 
contribution 

Contribution 

Periods 

-  Assure 

food  security;  combat  poverty;  contribute 

the 
reduction of world greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (objective 
2°C  at  the  2050  horizon);  promote  rational  management  of 
natural resources, a low-carbon and green-growth development 
strategy; enhance the resilience of populations and agricultural, 
forest and pastoral ecosystems. 

to 

-  Adaptation is essential for the country. In order to participate in 
the  mitigation  efforts  of  the  international  community,  Niger 
favours adaptation actions with strong co-benefits. 

-  Mitigation  in  the  energy  sector  requires  large  investments  to 

facilitate access to cheap, sustainable and clean energy. 

-  While  mobilising  its  own  national  resources,  the  country  hopes 
to  use  climate  financing  and  benefit  from  the  support  of 
international cooperation. 

-  30,801  GgCO2e.  (Second  National  Communication  (SCN), 

2000),  

-  Breakdown: Land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF), 
55.6%; agriculture, 34.6%; energy, 8.5%; waste, 1.2%; industrial 
processes, 0.06%. 

-  100%  of 

the  national 

territory  covered  by 

the 

intended 

contributions. 

-  Gases covered: CO2, CH4, N2O (88.7% of the gases emitted). 
-  Agriculture,  forestry  and  other  land  uses  (AFOLU)  sector:  89% 

of the total GHG emissions.  

-  Energy sector: 9% of the total GHG emissions. 

-  Contribution  based  on  a  mixed  results-and-action  approach, 
the  reference 

unconditional  and  conditional  according 
Business as Usual (BaU) scenario. 

to 

-  Results approach: % reduction of emissions, 2020-30.  
-  Action  approach:  Strategic  Framework  for  Sustainable  Land 
Management  (SF-SLM)  actions,  2015-29  (Nigerans  Feed 
Nigerans Initiative (I3N) focus). 

-  BaU :  2000  and  2030,  based  on  the  emissions  from  the  three 
national  communications:  Initial  National  Communication  (CNI), 
1990,  9,000  GgCO2e;  Second  National  Communication  (SCN), 
 

 

of 

Reduction 
GHG 
emissions  from 
now to 2030 

GHG 
emissions 
mitigation 
measures 
the 
horizon 

at 
2030 

Implementation 
process 

2000,  30,801  GgCO2e;  Third  National  Communication  (TCN), 
2008, 35,900 GgCO2éq.; 2020, 66,821 GgCO2éq.; 2030, 96,468 
GgCO2éq. 
Implementation  period:  2015-2030  (National  Durable  Land 
Management Strategy) (SF-SLM). 

- 

-  Unconditional reduction of 2.5% (BaU 2020) and 3.5% (2030). 
-  Conditional reduction of 25% (BaU 2020) and 34.6% (2030, or a 

reduction of 33,400 GgCO2e).  

AFOLU (Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Uses) : 
-  Upscaling of good sustainable land management practices over 
all  agroecological  areas  in  order  to  increase  the  resilience  of 
ecosystems and households and sequester carbon. 

-  Sustainable  management  of  forests  in  order  to  reduce  GHG 

emissions due to deforestation. 

Energy: 
-  Electricity:  Improvement  of  the  rate  of  access  to  electricity 
(overall,  exceed  10%  in  2010,  60%  in  2030,  of  which  47%  to 
100%  is  in  the  urban  zone  and  0.4%  to  30%  in  2030  is in  the 
rural zone.  

-  Cooking  energy:  reduction  in  the  demand  for  wood  energy  per 
inhabitant by the mass spread of improved cook stoves,  with a 
rate  of  penetration  of  100%  in  urban  areas  and  30%  in  rural 
areas; promotion as domestic gas of biogas and biofuels at both 
the industrial and family level. 

-  Spread of multifunctional platforms. 
Renewable energy: 
-  Exceed a capacity of 4 MW in 2010, 250 MW in 2030, 130 MW 
of  which  comes  from  the  Kandadji  hydroelectric  plant  and 
20°MW comes from wind energy (currently 0.035 MW). 

-  Double  the  rate  of  energy  mix  to  reach  30%  energy  mix  in  the 

primary and final energy balance. 

Energy efficiency: 
-  Decrease  of  25%  in  the  GDP  energy  intensity  (modern  and 

- 

traditional energy). 
Improving  energy  efficiency  in  industries  and  households, 
transportation  and  electricity  distribution  (reduction  of  losses 
from 12% to less than 10% in the 2020 horizon). 
-  Low-carbon home construction (without framing). 

-  Enhancement  of 

institutional, 

technical, 

financial  and 

telecommunications capabilities and technology transfer.  

-  Development  of  standard  files,  Strategic  Environmental  and 
Social  Assessments  (SESA)  and  Environmental  and  Social 
Impact  Assessments  (ESIA),  Measurement,  Notification  and 
Verification (MVN) procedures, project registration. 
Inclusive participation (private sector, NGO's, civil society).  

- 
 

 

 

 

Assumptions 
and 
methodology 

Climate 
change 
adaptation 
measures 

-  Second National Communication (SNC), 2000. 
- 
IPCC 2006 directives for national GHG inventories. 
-  Energy sector: LEAP, MAED, MESSAGE software. 
-  AFOLU sector: EX-ACT, TARAM software. 

-  Application  of  all  Strategic  Framework  for  Sustainable  Land 

Management (SF-SLM) techniques: 
-   Restoration of agricultural/forestry/pastoral lands: 1,030 000 

ha. 

-   Assisted natural regeneration: 1,100,000 ha. 
-   Fixation of dunes : 550,000 ha. 
-   Management of natural forests: 2,220,000 ha. 
-   Hedgerows: 145,000 km. 
-   Planting of multiuse species: 750,000 ha. 
-   Planting of Moringa oleifera : 125 000 ha. 
-   Seeding of roadways: 304,500 ha. 
-   Private forestry: 75,000 ha. 

Financial 
needs over ten 
years,  for  the 
period  2020-
2030 

-  Total  cost  of  the  INDC  over  10  years:  US  $8.667  billion  (US 
$866.7  per  year),  or  48%  of  the  GDP  and  US  $490  per 
inhabitant, of which: 
-  Adaptation:  US  $1.607  billion,  of  which  US  $0.337  billion 

(21%) is unconditional and US $ 1.270 (79%) is conditional. 

-  Mitigation:  US  $7.060  billion,  of  which  $0.830  billion 

unconditional (12%) and $6.230 US conditional (88%). 

Ambitious  and 
fair character 

-  Since  Niger  is  a  non-  Annex  I  Party  to  the  UNFCCC,  it  has  no 

quantitative obligations with respect to mitigation. 

-  However,  Niger  is  contributing  to  the  reduction  of  worldwide 
through  a  double  results/actions 

impacts 

climate  change 
approach. 

reference  year) 

-  Emissions  of  30,801  GgCO2e  in  2000  (the  Second  National 
Communication 
tons  per 
inhabitant  and  0.07%  of  the  worldwide  emissions  of  CO2. 
Despite  its  important  need  to  develop  its  economy  and  combat 
poverty,  Niger's  ambition  is  to  limit  its  emissions  to  2,1 
tCO2e/inhabitant  in  the  2030  horizon  (within  the  framework  of 
the conditional objective). 

represent  2.8 

-  Since 2015, Niger has been implementing its INDC, through the 
Strategic Framework for Sustainable Land Management and the 
Kandadji hydroelectric plant, among other things. 

-  Niger supports the mechanisms of the international CO2 market, 
such  as  the  Clean  Development  Mechanisms  (CDM),  but 
revised 
the  access  of  National  Development 
Programmes (NDP) to this financing.  For this purpose, it hopes 
to see a high price for CO2 (US $50 /t) that will permit it to reach 
the global objective of 2°C. 

facilitate 

to 
 
 

NATIONAL CONDITIONS 

Niger is a Sahelian country, three-fourths of the area of which (1,267,000 km2) is situated 
in  the  desert  zone,  which  makes  it  highly  exposed  to  climate  risks,  with  rainfall  that  is 
highly variable during the year, in terms of both space and time.  

Its  population  of  17.7  million  has  a  high  rate  of  demographic  growth  (3.9%  per  year) 
(RGPH, 2011). A completely landlocked country, its GDP was US $6.3 billion in 2015, or 
US $413 per inhabitant, with a human development index of 0.374, placing it in the lowest 
rank of countries (UNDP). The production of the primary sector, dominated by the  agro- 
pastoral sector with 37% of the GNP and 80% of employment (INS), varies greatly from 
year to year.  

The objectives of Niger's INDC are to assure food security, combat poverty and contribute 
to the reduction of world greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions so that they will not increase 
in  excess  of  2°C  in  the  2050  horizon  thanks  to  green  growth  and  a  low-carbon 
development strategy, the purpose of which is to assure resilience of the population and 
ecosystems.  

It  should  be  recalled  that  in  June  1992  Niger  signed  the  United  Nations  Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and ratified it on 25 July 1995. It also signed 
the Kyoto Protocol in December 1996 and ratified it on 17 March 2004. In the context of 
implementing  this  agreement,  Niger  prepared  and  presented  to  various  Conferences  of 
the  Parties  (COP's)  the  Initial  National  Communication  and  the  Second  National 
Communication  on  climate  change.  The  Third  National  Communication  is  now  being 
prepared. In these communications, GHG inventories were performed in five sectors: land 
use  and  land  use  change  and  forestry;  agriculture/animal  husbandry;  energy;  industrial 
process and use of solvents; and waste management. For more than three decades Niger 
has  made  important  investments  related  to  reducing  vulnerability  to  climate  change, 
particularly  with  projects  implementing  the  Maradi  commitment  (1984)  to  combat 
desertification. Although the results of these inventories showed that Niger is first of all a 
carbon sink because of GHG sequestration, the first three sectors, which are the greatest 
emission sources in the country, have been the subject of specific mitigation studies. 

Like  other  non-Annex  I  countries  of  the  list  of  the  UNFCCC,  Niger  has  no  obligation  to 
present  GHG  emissions  mitigation  measures.  At  the  same  time,  the  fact  remains  that, 
since it is a Party to the Convention and in conformity with the commitments made by the 
states Party to the UNFCCC at  the time of COP20 in Lima,  Peru, Niger is committed to 
contributing to the world effort to reduce GHG emissions so that the increase in the global 
temperature will not exceed 2°C in the 2050 horizon.  

With  this  in  view,  Niger  participates  in  the  global  effort  to  stabilise  GHG  emissions  by 
presenting  its  ambitions  and  its  capacity  to  mitigate  these  emissions.  This  capacity 
depends  largely  on  the  application  of  sectoral  priorities  and  the  national  strategic 
frameworks  for  sustainable  development.  Thus,  Niger's  priority  is  to  focus  first  of  all  on 
strategies for adaptation and resilience to climate change. 
 

 

For  Niger's  INDC,  the  adaptation  options  considered  as  top  priority  are  those  that  will 
permit the higher co-benefits with respect to climate change mitigation, particularly those 
good  adaptation  practices  and  techniques  which,  at  the  level  of  the  country's  eight 
regions,  will  permit  carbon  sequestration  and  reduction  of  GHG  emissions  at  the  same 
time.  These  adaptation  options  have  already  been  well  defined  in  the  existing  strategic 
frameworks, such as the Economic and Social Development Plan (PDES 2012-2015 and 
2016-2020),  which  flows  from  the  Sustainable  Development  and  Inclusive  Growth 
Strategy  - Niger 2035 (SDDCI), the 3N Initiative (Nigerans Feed Nigerans), the National 
Policy  on  Climate  Change  (PNCC),  the  Strategic  Framework  for  Sustainable  Land 
Management (SF-SLM), and the National Strategy and Plan of Action for Climate Change 
and Variability (SNPA-CVC). 

The  preparation  of  the  INDC  has  included  the  following  steps:  designation  of  an  INDC 
focal  point;  establishment  of  the  Technical  Steering  Committee  (TSC)  made  up  of  the 
stakeholders;  the  scoping  mission  and  kick-off  workshop;  the  collection  of  data  and 
documentary research; the workshop on capacity development and validation of options 
and analytical results; the national validation workshop on the draft INDC; the adoption of 
the INDC by the government of Niger; and the submission of the INDC to COP21 in Paris 
on December 15. 
PRIORITY SECTORS  

The National Communications indicate that the AFOLU and energy sectors represent on 
average 89% and 9% of Niger's total GHG emissions. Given the potential offered by the 
country's resources, the national concerns are focussed on issues related to adaptation, 
particularly  in  the  AFOLU  (agriculture/animal  husbandry  and  land  use)  sector,  and  on 
issues  related  to  mitigation,  principally  in  the  AFOLU  sector  and  the  energy  sector 
(transportation and residential and industrial energy).  

The strategy is based on the vision of climatically intelligent agriculture and on access to 
modern  energy  services  for  everyone  in  2030.  The  search  for  solid  co-benefits  that 
combine  mitigation  and  adaptation  is  the  basis  for  Niger's  INDC.  However,  while  the 
AFOLU and energy sectors are the priority action areas of the INDC on climate change in 
Niger,  the  implementation  of  the  INDC  actual  represents  cross-sectoral  support  for  all 
sectors of the economy. 
MITIGATION COMPONENT 

4.1 General objectives 

Niger's  strategy  is  based  on  the  vision  of  climate-smart  agriculture  and  on  access  to 
modern  energy  services  for  everyone  in  2030.  Concerning  the  latter  point,  Niger  has 
adopted  the  Regional  White  Book  of  the  Economic  Community  of  West  African  States 
(ECOWAS),  which  recognizes  that  access  to  modern  energy  services  makes  a  major 
contribution  to  improved  access  to  basic  social  services  (health,  education,  potable 
water); to increased productivity of households in cooking, lighting and transportation; to 
giving impetus to the creation of income-producing economic activities; to freeing women 
from  chores  such  as  gathering  wood  and  water  and  shelling  peas  and  beans;  to 
preserving  the  environment  and  improving  the  quality  of  life  of  rural  populations;  and  to 
promoting local jobs and  stabilising populations in order to contain the rural exodus and 
check uncontrolled urbanisation. 
 

 

4.2 Reference scenario 

4.2.1  AFOLU sector 

The  AFOLU  sector  is  characterised  by  the  significant  growth  of  cultivated  areas  at  the 
expense of forests (the shrub-steppe habitat and grazing lands). This leads to the need to 
decouple the trends in these types of land occupation by upscaling the good practices of 
sustainable  land  management  (SLM).  The  AFOLU  sector  consists  of  the  following  sub-
sectors. 

•  Land use, land-use change and forestry sub-sector (LULUCF): 

The  loss  of  100,000  ha  per  year  to  deforestation  is  due  to  the  clearing  of  land  for 
agriculture  and  the  exploitation  of  timber,  used  principally  as  household  firewood.  The 
shrub-steppe habitat (grazing areas) is giving way to agriculture, with around 4 million ha 
of grazing  land  disappearing  between  1975  and  2013. This  makes  it  necessary  to  have 
an  approach  based  on  climate-smart  agriculture  (CSA).  The  figure  below  shows  the 
changes  in  km²  of  agricultural  land  and  shrub-steppes  in  Niger  from  1975  to  2013 
(CILSS/USGS, 2015). 

 

 

•  Agriculture-livestock sub-sector: 

The  agriculture  sub-sector  consists  of  agricultural  and  grazing  activities  and  its  GHG 
emissions  come  from  enteric  fermentation  (60%),  manure  management  (39%),  on-site 
burning of residues, agricultural soils and rice growing (1%). 

The potential agricultural land represents 13% of the country, of which 40% is cultivated. 
Low  fertilisation,  reduced  summer  fallow  and  expansion  of  cultivated  land  leads  to  soil 
degradation  through  the  growth  of  water  and  wind  erosion  and  makes  it  impossible  to 
assure that the biomass of the soil will be maintained. 

Only 30% of the irrigable potential of 330,000 ha (I3N 2012-15), located essentially in the 
Niger river valley and some adjacent valleys, is utilised. Given the country's need for rice, 
which  in  the  long  term  will  increase  because  of  population  growth,  it  is  necessary  to 
implement a policy of increasing the rice-growing area. 
 

 

The potential for animal husbandry is significant (37 million head in 2008, SDE, 2013-35) 
thanks  to  vast  grazing  areas  that  can  be  exploited  through  transhumance  and  the 
development of large above-ground water resources. The population's attachment to the 
practice  of  grazing  is  encouraged  by  the  presence  of  a  market  of  almost  160  million 
consumers in Nigeria, which shares a 1,500 kilometre border with Niger. 

4.2.2  Energy sector 

The  National  GHG  Inventory  Report  of  2000  divides  the  GHG  emissions  of  the  energy 
sector among transportation (41%), residential (37%), power production units (15%) and 
manufacturing  industries  (5%).  The  other  sub-sectors  (business  and  institutional, 
agriculture-fishing-fish farming, mines) total less than 3%. National energy consumption is 
going  to  triple  between  now  and  2030,  principally  because  of  strong  growth  in  the 
residential, transportation, industrial and mining sub-sectors.  

4.2.3  Overall GHG emissions trends under BAU 

Taking 2000 as the base year (SNC) and an INDC implementation period extending from 
2015  to  2030  (SF-SLM),  the  figure  below  shows  the  GHG  emissions  trend  for  Niger 
between 1990 and 2030. 

The  base  year  emissions  are  30,801  GgCO2e,  distributed  between  LULUCF:  55.6%; 
Agriculture: 34.6%; Energy: 8.5%; Waste: 1.2%; and Industrial processes: 0.06%. 

The  2000  and  2030  BaU  are  based  on  the  emissions  levels  in  the  three  National 
Communications: Initial National Communication, 1990: 9,000 GgCO2e; Second National 
Communication,  2000:  30,801  GgCO2e;  Third  National  Communication,  2008:  35,900 
GgCO2e; BAU, 2020: 66,821 GgCO2e; BAU, 2030: 96,468 GgCO2e. 

 
 

 

4.3 Conditional and unconditional mitigation measures 

4.3.1  AFOLU sector 

The  upscaling  of good SLM  practices  are,  at  the  same  time,  measures  of  adaptation  to 
climate  change  and  measures  to  mitigate  GHG  emissions.  Their  implementation  is  the 
object  of  ongoing  and  planned  projects  and  is  accompanied  by  research  into  the 
improvement of agro-silvo pastoral productivity. These have been selected for the INDC: 
restoration  of  agricultural,  forest  and  grazing  land:  1,030,000  ha;  assisted  natural 
regeneration:  1,100,000  ha;  dune  fixation:  550,000  ha;  management  of  natural  forests: 
2,220,000  ha;  hedgerows:  145,000  km;  planting  of  multi-use  species:  750,000  ha; 
planting  of  Moringa  oleifera:  125,000  ha;  seeding  of  roadways:  304,500  ha;  and  private 
forestry:  75,000  ha.  A  total  cost  model  for  upscaling  good  SLM  practices  comes  to  US 
$1.27 billion. The strategic framework for sustainable land management (SF-SLM 2015-
2029) indicates mobilisation of financing at the level of 10% of the costs of upscaling, i.e. 
US $107.6 in 2009, through the unconditional budget of the government and the financial 
partner. The conditional SLM comes to US $968.06 million. 

4.3.2  Energy sector 

The unconditional mitigation options in the energy sector concern the management of the 
residential  sub-sector  through rural  electrification  and  the  conservation  and  replacement 
of wood energy; the management of the transportation and residential sub-sectors; rural 
electrification;  economising  of  wood  energy  and  reduction  of  specific  consumption  in 
transportation;  management  of  the  sector  concerned  with  the  demand  for  and 
transformation and dissemination of renewable energies; improving the energy efficiency 
of the sectors; and promoting solar photovoltaic for pumping and electrification.  

The conditional technologies for the energy sector in the medium and long terms relate to: 
exploitation  of  photovoltaic  and  thermal  solar  energy;  exploitation  of  wind  energy; 
construction  of  a  nuclear  power  plant  and  a  gas  power  plant;  hydroelectricity; 
economising  the  use  of  wood  for  cooking;  energy  efficiency;  use  of  biogas;  and 
construction  of  frame-free  buildings.  The  impact  of  the  electricity  scenarios  on  the 
reduction of GHG has been evaluated in an IAEA report.1 CO2 emissions per inhabitant 
will  increase  more  significantly  in  the  Electricity  for  All  scenarios  and  the  no  action 
scenario (without reduction of GHG). This is explained by the greater utilisation of coal in 
electricity production under these two scenarios. The National Action Plan for Sustainable 
Energy  for  All  (SE4ALL)  is  calculated  to  cost  US  $6  billion  in  the  2030  horizon.  The 
unconditional  financing  that  has  been  mobilised  and  the  conditional  financing  total  US 
$5.28 billion. 

The mitigation potential of the energy sector is 700 GgCO2e, i.e. 0.7% of the total national 
emissions. A reduction in this emission is noted in the Electricity for All scenario beginning in 
2025, which is explained by the growth of production from gas and by the entry of nuclear 
power  production  into  the  system,  as  shown  in  the  figure  below  (CO2  emissions  per 
inhabitant under three scenarios).  

                                                

1 Evaluation study of electricity supply and demand in Niger from 2010 2035, 2014. 
 

 

 

Source: PANEDT/IAEA, 2014 

4.3.3  Mitigation of the two sectors put together 

Niger's contribution is based on a results-action mix. The emissions reduction of the two 
priority sectors, AFOLU, and energy is estimated at 33,400 GgCO2e, 34,7% compared to 
BaU in 2030. According to figure 3 below: 

•  For 2030, the INDC with unconditional financing permits a GHG emissions reduction of 
3.5%  compared  to  BAU,  while  the  INDC  with  conditional  financing  permits  an 
emissions reduction of 34.6 % compared to BaU. 
 For  2020, the INDC  under  unconditional financing  permits  a  2.5%  reduction  of GHG 
emissions compared to BaU (2030), while the INDC with conditional financing permits 
an emissions reduction of 25% compared to BaU. 

• 

The overall cost of the conditional INDC is US $6.25 billion, or 87%, and the overall cost 
of  the  unconditional  INDC  is  US  $827  million,  or  13%,  as  shown  in  the  table  below 
(summary of GHG emissions reductions and costs for 2020-2030). 

 

 
 

 

 

GHG  reduction 
in 
comparison 
to BaU 2020 

GHG  reduction 
in 
comparison 
to BaU 2030 

Costs  compared 
to  BaU  2030  in 
billions of USD  

Conditional INDC 

25% 

Unconditional INDC 

2.5% 

4.4 Ambition and fairness  

34.6% 

3.5% 

6.25 

0.83 

Niger's GHG emissions of 30,801 GgCO2e represent 2.8 t per inhabitant and only 0.061% 
of  world  CO2  emissions.  Since  it  is  non-  Annex  I  Party  to  the  UNFCCC, Niger  does  not 
have  a  quantitative  obligation  in  terms  of  mitigation.  However,  despite  its  great  need  to 
develop  its  economy  and  the  need  to  lift  a  large  part  of  its  population  out  of  poverty, 
Niger's ambition is to limit its emissions to 2.1 t CO2e per inhabitant in the 2030 horizon, 
within the framework of a conditional objective.  To do this, Niger hopes to see a carbon 
price  commensurate  with  international  concerns  (US  $50/t),  which  would  facilitate  the 
double results/actions approach and optimise its contribution on a worldwide scale. 

4.5 Method used to estimate emissions 

 The  reported  GHG  emissions  contained  in  the  three  National  Communications  have 
been  used  to  establish  the  greenhouse  gas  trends  in  Niger  from  1990  to  2030.  In  the 
AFOLU sector, the EX ACT programme has been used to simulate the carbon stored in 
the projects between the two dates. In the energy sector, the LEAP model has been used, 
as shown in the figure below (projection of total energy demand in the 2029 horizon). 

 

 
 

 

For  the  study  on  "the  evaluation  of  Niger's  energy  demand  and  supply  for  the  period 
2010-2035"  (Ministry  of  Energy  and  Petroleum/Bureau  of  Energy,  December  2013),  the 
IAEA models MAED and MESSAGE were used. 
ADAPTATION COMPONENT 

5.1 Justification of the component 

Niger  is  not  a  country  that  represents  a  source  of  GHG  emissions,  but  rather  a  net 
absorption sink. Moreover, since Niger is situated along the edge of the dry areas of the 
Sahara,  it  is  directly  impacted  by  the  consequences  of  climate  change.  Taking  into 
consideration the potential offered by the country's resources, the national concerns are 
centred  first  of  all  on  issues  related  to  adaptation  (with  its  mitigation  co-benefits)  in  the 
priority  AFOLU  sector,  and  then  in  the  priority  energy  sector  (transportation  and 
residential  and  industrial  energy).  The  other  areas  important  to  the  country  are  those 
related to transfer of technology and capacity building. 

5.2 Impacts of climate change and Niger's vulnerability 

Various  studies  carried  out  in  connection  with  the  National  Communications  on  climate 
change in Niger mention the increasing variability of precipitation in terms of both space 
and time; a trend of increased temperatures, particularly since 1996; increased frequency 
and intensity of extreme climate risks (droughts, floods, violent winds and sand and dust 
storms, the enemies of crops); the silting of water courses (Niger River valley and Lake 
Chad) and oases; drought losses in Niger estimated at more than US $70 million (World 
Bank,  Climate  Risk  Assessment,  Niger,  2012);  the  damage,  including  costs,  caused  to 
key  sectors  of  the  economy  by  the  floods  in  the  2000's,  estimated  at  US  $18  million 
(DPCS, OCHA 2009). 

5.3 National Priorities for Adaptation to Climate Change 

The  national  priorities  for  the  AFOLU  sector  relate  to  improving  the  resilience  of  the 
agriculture, animal husbandry and forestry sub-sectors. The other priorities concern water 
resources, fishing, fauna, health and capacity building of the actors at all levels. Adapting 
to  climate  change  is  a  challenge  for  the  country.  In  order  to  achieve  it,  the  adaptation 
techniques appropriate for Niger relate in particular to sustainable land management (SF-
SLM  2014),  renewable  energy  and  energy  efficiency.  Because  of  its  relevance  and  its 
conclusions, the SF-SLM is the chosen reference document for the INDC.  

5.4 Niger's initiatives supporting adaptation 

Of  the  projects  focussed  on  adaptation  to  climate  change  in  Niger,  the  following  are 
already under way: 

•  Projects financed by the French Development Agency (AFD), including extension 
of  the  NIGELEC  electrical  network  (US  $46.33  million);  the  socioeconomic 
development  of  Kandadji  (US  $15.8  million);  support  for  the  food  security  of 
households (US $1.36 million); development and management of the Badaguichiri 
watershed  (US  $12.4  million);  and  management  of  the  natural  forests  for  the 
sustainable supply of wood energy to Sahelian cities (Bamako, Ouagadougou and 
Niamey) (US $1.7 million). 

•  The PANA Resilience/FEM/ACDI project (US $7.0 million), which has been going 
on  since  2010  at  the  commune  level  in  seven  regions  and  allows  the  good 
practices to be put to use in the use of improve varieties, market gardening, use of 
meteorological  data,  seeding  of  degraded  grazing  areas  and  income-producing 
activities. 

•  The African Climate Change Adaptation Programme (P2AA) (US $610,000), which 

is setting up an index-based insurance prototype to prevent episodes of drought. 
 

 

•  The  PNUD/FED  Community  Based  Adaptation  project  (CBA)  costing  US  $4.26 
million over four years beginning in 2015, which is operating in the departments of 
Dakoro and Bermo. 

•  The Climate-Smart Agriculture Support Project of HC-13N, financed by the World 
Bank in the amount of US $111 million beginning in 2016 and lasting five years in 
20 departments. 

•  The  PRASE-FEM  project,  the  objective  of  which  is  to  facilitate  access  to  power 

services, for a cost of US $5.47 million. 

•  The  Strategic  Programme  for  Climate  Resilience  (PSRC),  consisting  of  three 
projects  (PAC-RC,  PROMOVARE and  PDIPC)  and  financed  at  the  level  of  US 
$100 million. 

•  The Food Security Support Project in the Maradi region (PASADEM) for a cost of 
$  US  31.7  million,  which  is  dealing  with  aspects  of  resilience  in  the  rural 
environment. 

•  And  a  number  of  other  projects  financed  through  bilateral  and  multilateral 

cooperation. 

5.5 Adaptation measures 

The  consultations  with  stakeholders  have  stressed  the  need  for  the  INDC  to  seek 
complementarities  with  existing  processes  by  preventing  its  contents  from  replacing, 
duplicating  or  weakening  the  national  climate  change  response  processes  that  are 
already  under  way,  such  as  the  National  Adaptation  Programme  (NAP)  and  Nationally 
Appropriate  Mitigation  Actions  (NAMA),  which  are  the  reference  national  processes  for 
adaptation  and  mitigation.  Thus,  in  order  to  be  complementary  with  the  existing 
processes, the INDC aims at specific measures and is committed to applying them. In the 
priority  AFOLU  priority  sector,  the  implementation  of  the  proposed  INDC  relates  to  the 
application  of  a  set  of  techniques  coming  from  the  SF-SLM  over  the  period  2015-2030. 
The table in Annex 2 lists the techniques from the SF-SLM and the objectives in terms of 
areas covered that have to be achieved to implement them in the INDC. Thus, the cost of 
upscaling  the  SF-SLM  is  estimated  at  US  $1.27  billion  (conditional),  knowing  that  US 
$0.337 billion (unconditional) has already been mobilised, for an overall adaptation cost of 
US  $1.607  billion.  Mitigation  in  the  energy  sector  requires  much  larger  investments  in 
order  to  permit  access  to  clean,  sustainable  and  affordable  energy.  However,  in  the 
National Adaptation Plan and the INDC's vision for 2050, Niger would have to include all 
or part of a wide range of infrastructures (highways, bridges, dikes, construction projects 
to mobilise and enhance water resources, projects and networks to clean up used water 
and solid waste).  

5.6 Co-benefits 

The co-benefits in the AFOLU sector consist of the results of implementing and upscaling 
the  Climate-Smart  Agriculture  activities:  strengthening  of  the  good  practices  of  assisted 
natural regeneration and recovery of degraded land; improvement of the balance sheet of 
cereals  and  fodder,  along  with  food  and  nutritional  security;  development  of  local  agro-
climate information; job creation and reduction of the rural exodus;  and strengthening of 
social cohesion. The projected annual benefits and costs of implementing and upscaling 
the  techniques  recommended  in  the  SF-SLM  and  selected  for  the  AFOLU  sector  in 
Niger's INDC are presented in the table in Annex 3, and the cost of implementing the SF-
SLM  over  the  first  ten  years  (2016-2030)  is  estimated  at  US  $127,393,000.  The  co-
benefits in the energy sector relate to improvement in the people's living conditions as a 
result of increased income through social welfare, access to potable water, education and 
health, as well as access to new information and communication technologies (NICT) and 
energy  equipment,  development  of  local  entrepreneurship,  alleviation  of  women's 
domestic duties and reduction of the rural exodus through job creation. 
 

 

5.7 Accent on Climate-Smart Agriculture 

The  techniques  of  climate-smart  agriculture  (CSA)  are  consistent  with  the  objectives  of 
the  INDC  (adaptation,  mitigation  and  food  security)  by  strengthening  grassroots 
development.  Climate-smart  agriculture  takes  into  account  weather  information,  early 
warning,  the  management  of  risks  and  disasters  and  index-based  agricultural  weather 
insurance.  The  inclusion  of  climate  change  in  local  (PDC  programme),  regional  and 
national planning (in the health and animal husbandry sectors) are tested and approved 
good  practices  in  Niger  and  are  therefore  taken  into  consideration  in  the  INDC.  The 
advantages brought by the measures of climate-smart agriculture should satisfy from the 
outset all of the actors involved in the responses to climate change: on the one hand the 
people  of  Niger  and  their  government,  who  thus  set  adaptation  to  climate  change  and 
food security as a priority and, on the other hand, the international community, which sees 
that  the  mitigation  of  climate  change  is  effectively  taken  into  account  in  the  adaptation 
measures. In addition, these measures can be put in place immediately and thus make it 
possible to give priority to this action since the technical experimentation phase is being 
carried out in the various agroecological regions of the country (it remains only to upscale 
them) and because their impacts and their costs and benefits have been evaluated and 
their  socioeconomic  relevance  and  economic  return  have  been  demonstrated. 
Emphasising  these  objectives  and  results,  which  are  clearly  defined  in  Niger's  INDC, 
should  allow  the  technical  and  financial  partners  to  support  this  integrated  vision  of 
adaptation  and  mitigation.  This  will  make  it  possible  to  galvanise  their  technical  and 
financial support for the implementation of these responses, which are both workable and 
well suited to linking good climate change options to national development. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INDC 

6.1  Institutional structure 

The  process  of  implementing  the  INDC  is  an  opportunity  to  build  institutional  and 
technical capacities, stimulate policy integration and promote inclusive development. The 
national  institutions  necessary  to  implement  the  INDC  programmes  exist.  They  are  the 
Ministry  of  the  Environment,  Urban  Hygiene  and  Sustainable  Development  (MESUDD), 
the agency currently responsible for the preparation of the INDC, in cooperation with the 
Executive  Secretariat  of  the  National  Council  of  the  Environment  for  Sustainable 
Development  (CNEDD),  the  focal  point  for  the  UNFCCC.  However,  alternatives  can  be 
envisaged:  institutional  anchoring  of  the  INDC  to  MESUDD,  with  focal  points  in  the 
concerned institutions; establishment of an operationally independent executive agency; a 
supreme authority for the INDC, etc. An institutional analysis will have to be considered to 
evaluate these options. 
 

 

6.2 Obstacles and gaps 

To obtain the necessary financing, one option would be to request international aid from 
the donors (the conditional option). Another option would be to attract financing from the 
private  sector  to  implement  the  SF-SLM.  For  this  purpose,  the  communities  have  the 
possibility of selling mitigation services on the carbon market. The possible problems with 
this option are the difficulty of accessing this market and the low level of current prices for 
carbon credits. Whether the financing is acquired conditionally or unconditionally, follow-
up actions will be essential to assure efficient use of the funding that is granted. 

Another major obstacle to implementing the INDC is the country's high rate of population 
growth.  At  present,  this rate  is  3.9%  per  year,  although  the government  is  committed to 
reducing  the  rate  to  2.5%  in  the  2035  horizon  (Sustainable  Development  and  Inclusive 
Growth Strategy (SDDCI) 2012-2035).  

The illiteracy of the rural population represents a real impediment to the dissemination of 
the  technologies  of  climate-smart  agriculture  and  sustainable  land  management  so  that 
these techniques can be upscaled. Effective schooling and the spread of literacy among 
the rural population, accompanied by a rural extension system, are in any case necessary 
to allow understanding and implementation of the techniques recommended in the INDC.  

The low qualification level of human resources, the insufficiency of logistical means and 
the  institutional  conflicts  related  to  supporting  the  upscaling  of  good  practices  require 
strengthening of rural leadership, particularly in the AFOLU sector. It is also necessary to 
secure  agricultural  and  pastoral  land  tenure  and  to  have  competent  field  operators  to 
improve the absorption capacity. 

The implementation of these measures requires improved coordination between institutions, 
synergy between policies and strategies, and appropriate allocation of expertise in the case 
of cross-sector projects. 
THE COUNTRY'S NEEDS 

The sustainable development objectives to which the INDC contributes cannot be realised 
without  the  transfer  of  appropriate  technologies  and  the  financing  and  building  of 
competencies,  while  taking  into  account  the  national  economic  and  social  development 
priorities defined for the various strategic frameworks. 

7.1 Financial support 

Attaining  the  objectives  of  Niger's  INDC  requires  a  total  investment  estimated  at  US 
$8.667 billion, US $7.5 billion of which (87% of the total) is dependent on access to new 
sources of financing (the Green Climate Fund and other climate financing mechanisms). 
The  unconditional  financing  coming  from  the  government's  own  resources  and  public 
development aid is estimated at US $1.167 billion, or 13% of the total cost. 

7.2 Technology transfer 

In  order  to  implement  the  INDC,  Niger  will  emphasise  the  need  for  the  transfer  of 
knowledge and technology in the priority sectors of AFOLU and energy. This needs relate 
essentially  to  the  upscaling  of  the  good  practices  of  climate-smart  agriculture,  to 
renewable  energy  technologies,  to  energy  efficiency  and  to  other  action  areas  such  as 
integrated  water  resources  management  (IWRM),  urban  waste  management,  fauna, 
fishing, social and health protection etc. 
 

 

7.3 Capacity building 

Capacity building relates to the design of bankable projects and the understanding of the 
donors' rules and procedures; the evaluation of adaptation projects in terms of economic 
and financial analysis; the establishment of the measurement, notification and verification 
system  (MNV);  knowledge  and  understanding  of  the  INDC  implementation  process; 
strategic  environmental  and  social  assessments  (SESA)  and  environmental  and  social 
impact statements (ESIA); land use planning; good practices for carbon management and 
sequestration; the carbonisation chain of charcoal for domestic use; the mapping of soils; 
the  development  of  a  national  forestry  plan;  and  the  rational  management  of  liquid  and 
solid wastes etc. These activities should concern, first of all, the stakeholders in the INDC 
implementation process in Niger: the actors concerned with implementation of the INDC; 
the  economic  actors,  primarily  rural  smallholders,  the  Producer  Organisations  (PO: 
agriculture,  animal  husbandry  etc.)  and  any  INDC  investor  that  already  has  in  place 
advanced  planning for  his  project;  and  representatives  of  the  civil  society  and  NGO's. If 
INDC investments represent around 83% of the total amount, the operating cost can be 
estimated at 17% (particularly follow-up and evaluation), 10% of which is to be allocated 
to technology transfer and capacity building. 

7.4 Monitoring, evaluation and management 

The  INDC's  institutional  implementation  structure  includes  the  following:  a  "Country 
monitoring  and  evaluation  system"  which  takes  into  account  gender,  measurement, 
notification and verification (MNV) procedures, and a register of INDC projects.  

The  monitoring  and  evaluation  system  and  INDC  capitalisation  will  be  implemented  based 
on: monitoring and evaluation of the implementation process which will examine aspects of 
inter-sector  coordination,  of  the  decision-making  process,  etc.,  follow-up  and  evaluation  of 
the  effects  and  impacts  of  the  INDC  based  on  relevant  criteria  and  indicators  and  the 
definition of corrective measures for climate, environmental, economic and social protection, 
monitoring of risk and of the evolution of vulnerability to climate change at the national level, 
and capitalisation of experiences and the lessons learned. 

 
 
ANNEXES 

 

8.1 Annexe 1 : Abbreviations and acronyms 
AFD 

AFOLU 
ANR 
BaU 
CBA 
CC 
CDM 
CILSS 

CSA 
CNEDD 

CNI  
CO2 
COP  
CTN-CVC  

ECOWAS 
ESIA  
Ex-ACT 
FED 
FEM 
GCF 
GDP 
Gg CO2e 
GHG  
I3N  

IAEA 
INDC 
INS 
LDC 
LEAP 
LULUCF 
MAED  
MESSAGE  

MESUDD 

MNV 
NAMA 
NAP 
OCHA 
P2AA 
PANA 
PASADEM 

Agence  Française  de  Développement  (French  Development 
Agency) 
Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Uses 
Assisted Natural Regeneration 
Business as Usual (normal course of affairs without the INDC) 
Community Based Adaptation 
Climate Change 
Clean Development Mechanism 
Comité  Inter-Etats  de  Lutte  contre  la  Sécheresse  au  Sahel 
(Inter-State Committee to Combat Drought in the Sahel) 
Climate-Smart Agriculture 
Conseil  National  de  l'Environnement  pour  un  Développement 
Durable  (National  Environmental  and  Sustainable  Development 
Council) 
Initial National Contribution 
Carbon dioxide 
Conference of the Parties 
Commission Technique Nat. sur les Chang. et la Variabilité Clim. 
(National  Technical  Commission  on  Climate  Change  and 
Variability) 
Economic Community of the West African States 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
Ex-Ante Carbon-Balance Tool (software) 
European Development Fund 
Global Environment Facility 
Green Climate Fund 
Gross Domestic Product 
Gigagrammes equivalent carbon dioxide 
Greenhouse gas 
Initiative  « Les  Nigériens  Nourrissent  les  Nigériens »  (Nigerans 
Feed Nigerans Initative) 
International Atomic Energy Agency 
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution 
Institut National des Statistiques (National Institute of Statistics) 
Less Developed Countries 
Long-range Energy Alternatives Planning system (software) 
Land Utilisation, Land Use Change and Forestry 
Energy Demand Analysis Model 
Model for Energy Supply Strategy Alternatives and their General 
Environmental Impacts 
Ministry  of  the  Environment,  Urban  Hygiene  and  Sustainable 
Development 
Measurement, Notification, Verification (MDP, REDD etc.) 
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions 
National Adaptation Programme 
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
African Climate Change Adaptation Programme 
National Action Plan for Adaptation 
Maradi Project to Support Food Security for Development 
PDC 

PDES 

PNCC  

RGPH  

SCN  

SDDCI  

SDE 

SESA 
SLM  
SF-SLM 
SNPA/CVC  

TARAM 

TCN 

TFP 
TMC 
UNDP 
UNFCCC 

 

  

 

 

(Second  National 

Plan  de  Développement  Communal  (Commune  Development 
Plan) 
Programme  de  Développement  Economique  et  Social 
(Economic and Social Development Plan) 
Politique  Nationale  sur  les  Changements  Climatiques  (National 
Climate Change Policy) 
Recensement Général de la Population et de l'Habitat (General 
Census of Population and Housing)  
Seconde  Communication  Nationale 
Communication) 
Stratégie de Développement Durable et de Croissance Inclusive 
(Sustainable Development and Inclusive Growth Strategy) 
Schéma  de  Développement  de  l'Elevage  (Animal  Husbandry 
Development Scheme) 
Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
Sustainable Land Mangement 
Strategic Framework for Sustainable Land Management 
Strat. Nat. et le Plan d'Action en matire de Chang. et Variabilité 
Clim. (National Strategy and Action Plan for Climate Change and 
Variability) 
Tool 
Methodologies 
Troisime  Communication  Nationale 
Communication) 
Technical and Financial Partner 
Technical Monitoring Committee  
United National Development Programme (PNUD) 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 

and  Reforestation  Approved 

for  Afforestation 

(Third  National 

8.2  Annex  2 :  Projected  annual  benefits  and  costs  of 

adaptation measures 

Techniques 

Surface area (in 
thousands of ha) 

Restoration of 
agricultural land 

Assisted natural 
regeneration 

1,030 

1,100 

Dune fixation 

550 

First 
quantified 
benefit 

Increased 
yields 

Increased 
yields 

Increased 
yields 

Second 
quantified 
benefit 

Increased 
earnings 

Increased 
earnings 

Increased 
earnings 

Management of 
natural forests 

2,220 

Timber. 

- 

Planting of 
hedgerows (145,000 
km) : 

29 

Planting of gum 
trees and doum 

750 

Increased 
yields 

Increased 
timber 

Gum and 
leaves 

Increased 
timber 

Costs 

(in thousands 
of $) 

309,000 

33,000 

220,000 

222,000 

46,980 

300,000 
 

125 

Leaves 

 

palms 

Planting of 
Moringa oleifera  

Herbaceous 
seeding 

304.5 

Straw and 
fodder 

Timber 

Private forestry 

750 

TOTAL 

6,858 

 

- 

- 

- 

 

37,500 

30,450 

75,000 

1,273,930 

Source: Workshop on capacity building of actors, CPDN 2015. 

 
 

 

8.3  Annex 3 : Projected areas in sustainable land management 

(SLM) for the INDC 

The  annual  cost  of  implementing  the  Strategic  Framework  for  Sustainable  Land 
Management  (SF-SLM)  over  the  first  ten  years  (2016-2030)  is  estimated  at  US 
$127,393,000, as indicated in the table below (proposed schedule and budget for Niger's 
INDC adaptation measures, in areas and costs per year for the first ten years). 

 

SF-SLM technologies 

Projected annual areas 
for the period 2016-30 

Annual budget for 
the period 2016-30 

(in ha/year) 

(in US$) 

1. Restoration of agricultural land  

68,667 

2. Assisted natural regeneration  

73,333 

3. Dune fixation 

36,666 

4. Management of natural forests  

148,000 

5. Hedgerows 

6.  Planting  of  gum  trees  and 
douma palms 

9,667 

50,000 

7. Planting of Moringa oleifera 

8,333 

8. Herbaceous seeding  

9. Private forestry 

TOTAL 

20,300 

50,000 

 

Source: Workshop on capacity building of actors, INDC, 2015. 

 30,900,000  

3,300,000  

22,000,000  

22,200,000  

4,698,000  

30,000,000  

3,750,000  

3,045,000  

7,500,000  

127,393,000  
